Write You A Scheme, Version 2.0
------------

## Welcome
Welcome to Write You a Scheme, Version 2.0. ([version 1](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Write_Yourself_a_Scheme_in_48_Hours/
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Write_Yourself_a_Scheme_in_48_Hours.pdf)) You may be familiar with the original Write You a Scheme, and this tutorial is designed as an upgraded version to reflect modern Haskell. It uses as much modern, industry ready Haskell that I know. This series will teach readers how to create a programming language by walking the reader through the components of a Scheme Lisp in Haskell. This should take about a  weekend of study/programming for a beginner who might have to look up a few new concepts to really internalize the material. I won't have time to go into a lot of detail on things like monad transformer or interpreter theory, so f you are looking for a good Haskell intro, may I suggest Learn You a Haskell for Great Good or Stephen Diehls "What I Wish I Knew When Learning Haskell"  for a more comprehensive guide. I want this to be a community project, so if you have improvements, please contact me over Github or on twitter (@wespiser). Ive had to balance language features, tutorial breadth, and level of complexity to provide beginners with a robust implementation they will not take long to understand, if you have any ideas on how I can better meet these goals, please let me know! I am an advocate of open source languages, although it is possible to use our Scheme to build a vendor-specific language, [this](https://www.stickyminds.com/article/hey-vendors-give-us-real-scripting-languages?page=0%2C0) article spells out why that is a bad idea. However, If your company needs a DSL, feel free to use and improve the final product, we're building together, the rest is up to you.

## Why Lisp ?
Although the majority of modern programming follows C/Algo, Lisp syntax is much simpler, using the same syntax to represent code and data, the list.  This is called homoiconicity, one of the most beautiful features of the language. Scheme, a dialect of Lisp, is an especially straight-forward lisp.  I won't strictly follow the Scheme standard for the sake of brevity, but aim to make a Scheme pretty close to the one in Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs. This is an incredible text, and well worth a read for the interested language developer or enthusiast at any level of experience. If you are interested in what a fully fledged Scheme looks like, Haskell-Scheme (github) is a fully featured language, in Haskell, and Chicken-Scheme implements in C. The scheme we will write will contain the basic elements of these more
featured languages. The Scheme Programming Language is a great book to teach the function of an industrial strength reference Scheme, and is a great source to explain language features.


While on the topic of Lisp, Clojure Programming Language is a modern, functional approach to Lisp targeting the JVM. If you are interested in designing your own Lisp, Clojure is a great example of how you can take adopt Lisp to the modern programming environment. It is probably the most supported modern Lisp community,  and is a great source of information and ideas.  

## Why Haskell ?
First off, why not? Haskell is a purely functional, typed, compiled, and lazy language with many sophisticated and advanced features. With over two decades of research level and industrial development, Haskell has been the focus of numerous computer science research projects and implements these ideas w/ a production worthy compiler. These features give the programmer expressive power above and beyond todays status quo, and is a test bed for the features that will make tomorrow's language so much better than todays. With great power, comes great responsibility, and there many complex and under-adopted features that take a while to learn. Fortunately, there is only a subset of advanced features that are really needed to make Haskell an effective production language. It may be attractive to include advanced type theory extensions and over engineer your project with all the latest advances in type theory. If your background is in academic Haskell research or you have been hacking around in Haskell of years, there is no problem understanding, or learning how. If you are trying to hire developers to
work on your project with you, finding people who can be trained with less cost than the performance gains will be a serious hinderance when proposing your project to weary business type folks. For this reason, I take a conservative approach on what features and abstract concepts are used in this Scheme. When in doubt, I pick the simplest possible abstraction that is sufficient for functionality, and avoid extra language pragma and type theory extensions at all cost. If you use Haskell for work, your colleagues job will go a lot easier and less technical debt will emerge.  

## Project Tool Chain
What you need to run the project is in `Readme.md`, and if you are excited to start, skip to chapter 1!     
Haskell is not an island unto itself, and we must manage the libraries required to build the project. I recommend using Ubuntu, version 14.04 or 16.04, (any Linux distrobution should work, contact me if you have problems) and the build tool Stack. The library versions are determined for Stack in `scheme.cabal`, while `stack.yaml` is the version of Stack's dependency resolver, and `Build.hs` is Haskell code for generating documents from these markdown files. More info on stack, here: https://www.fpcomplete.com/blog/2015/06/why-is-stack-not-cabal. The `Readme.md` contains full instructions on how to build the project source code and documentation, which I encourage you to do. The best way to learn is to modify, break, fix, and finally improve the source code. Two included scripts, `build` which will monitor for file changes then build upon updates, and `run`, which will drop you into an interactive REPL, were invaluable in the development of this project. Please feel free to contact with me with any great ideas, modifications, improvements, or vaguely related but interesting concepts. I made this project for you, use it however you please.
